>> Bianca Gandolfo: So
merge sort is a divide and
conquer recursive sorting algorithm.
So our divide and
conquer steps our recognize the base case,
we're gonna have divide,
conquer and combine.
So for merge sort our base case was
when our array is a size of 1,
right, we're just gonna return up
because that's gonna be the sorted
array of length 1, right?
Our divide was every time we recurs
we were breaking our problem
into a left and a right.
And our conquer and
combine stops were the same.
So when we were merging
we were conquering, and
we're also combining in one step.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: So here's just a big
picture graphic of what all this means.
So we have our unsorted list,
and we keep breaking it in half,
breaking in half until we get
to our base case which is,
every element is a sorted list of one,
and then we merge them together in order.
So we swap, merge these, merge these and
then, again, we're gonna merge more,
merge more until finally,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: We
have it merged in order, yeah?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool, so
here is just some code for
our merge routine, we have a while loop.
So while our result is
less than the left and
the right,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Lengths,
you're gonna keep looping.
So our left and our right again are,
those are the two halves of
the array in question that we're
gonna merge into our result array.
So,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: You would go through,
push the one, that's smaller, and
at the end you're gonna return it.
So a couple of steps in there,
but that's the gist.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: This is probably the
toughest part of the merge sort algorithm
is the merge routine.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Awesome,
so here is the entire thing,
we have our base case,
remember we have a list of one.
So we're gonna divide it left,
divide it right,
we're gonna recursively sort the left, and
we're gonna recursively sort the right.
So what this does is we're gonna go left,
left, left, all the way to the bottom.
Then right, right, right,
all the way when we get to the top, and
then down the other way.
And you're gonna return leftSorted and
rightSorted and
this is where we're merging them.
So at the bottom,
we're just merging one and
one, and then as we recurse
up it will be two two etc.
And that way, cool,
any questions about this?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool,
reflection, who here feels like,
who here knew merge sort
before taking this class?
Okay, just David.
Anyone else?
Who here feels like if they were asked
today in an interview they could
implement merge sort?
Maybe, maybe, okay.
Where are the parts where you're like,
my God,
maybe I won't be able to do that part?
>> Speaker 2: Well, it kinda depends on,
[LAUGH] like I could definitely
pseudo-code it, I get it conceptually.
But like the other night I tried
to implement it just to make
sure I still got it, and I ran into some,
[LAUGH] just hiccups where it wasn't
working exactly how I wanted to do it.
But I think that's just kind of a practice
thing I need to run through
it a few more times.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool.
>> Speaker 2: I think maybe the tricky
part of merging is figuring out the logic
of what to do when you run
out of elements in one part.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: When the left or
right is empty, is that what you mean?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, so you've.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah, so
like maybe the left array is
a bunch of smaller elements and
then you have your right array,
which is a bunch of larger elements.
As you are merging and looping through,
suddenly your left array is empty and
you have items in your right array.
What do you do in that case?
And that was something that was tricky for
some people.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool, what else?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Anything?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Any questions,
about it?
>> Speaker 2: I never quite understood
how it works when you have an odd
number in the array and you're slicing it.
Does that just round somehow and-
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Yeah,
you either-
>> Speaker 2: So
you don't have any control
over what goes where?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: I mean, you can
choose, right, you can round up or down.
>> Speaker 2: And
in this example what are you doing?
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Let's see.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: So,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Let's see,
let's do array slice, let's make an array,
and test out what happens.
We want it to be an odd number, yeah?
So we're saying array.slice and
we're passing 0 and
an array.length over 2.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: So
this is gonna be our left.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: And then our right,
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Is just gonna do this,
cool, so let's check it out.
So our left, and our right so
our right is gonna have the greater one.
>> Speaker 2: So is that built into
slice that's doing the rounding?
Cuz arr.length divided by two
would return a decimal, right?
This one's just an integer
it drops the decimal in it?
>> Speaker 2: Did the division will,
drop the decimal or the slice does?
>> Speaker 3: Slice does.
Does it?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah cuz you're right.
>> Speaker 3: Because JavaScript
doesn't have an integer type, right?
So 5 divided by 2 would be 2.5.
>> Speaker 2: It would return 2.5.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, but
sliced as just treated as two.
>> Speaker 2: Cool, okay.
Does Python do that?
>> Speaker 3: It's complicated.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: [LAUGH]
>> Speaker 2: Depends on whether
you're using Python 2 or Python 3.
>> Speaker 3: Sure, okay.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool, so that would
be the difference if it was three.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: We
would be missing something.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool, good question.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Thank you.
>> Bianca Gandolfo: Cool.